contributing.md, before:

---
title: Contributing — Dev Quickstart
---

# Contributing — Dev Quickstart

Thanks for helping improve STAN! This project follows a services‑first, test‑first philosophy. Here’s how to get started locally.

## Setup
Prereqs:
- Node ≥ 20
- Git

Clone and install:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/karmaniverous/stan-cli.git
cd stan
npm i
```

## Common tasks

Run the full test and validation suite:
```bash
npm run lint
npm run typecheck
npm run test
npm run build
npm run docs
npm run knip
```

### Dev fallback (bootstrap scripts)
If `stan run` is temporarily broken while developing STAN itself, use the
bootstrap scripts as a stopgap to exercise the pipeline and generate the usual
artifacts (outputs and archive) without relying on the CLI:

- Primary orchestrator (runs multiple tasks concurrently and then archives):
  ```bash
  npm run bootstrap
  ```
  This will:
  - run typecheck, lint, test, build, and docs concurrently,
  - write deterministic outputs to `.stan/output/*.txt`,
  - and create `.stan/output/archive.tar`.

- You can also run individual bootstrap tasks:
  ```bash
  npm run bootstrap:typecheck
  npm run bootstrap:lint
  npm run bootstrap:test
  npm run bootstrap:build
  npm run bootstrap:docs
  npm run bootstrap:archive
  ```

Note: these bootstrap scripts are for STAN development only (fallback tooling).
Consumers of STAN should use the CLI directly, e.g. `stan run`.

## Coding standards

- Single‑Responsibility modules; prefer small, testable units.
- Plain unified diffs for patches.
- Keep `.stan/system/stan.todo.md` updated with each change set and include a commit message (fenced) in chat replies.

## Submitting changes

1. Create a feature branch: `git checkout -b feature/your-change`
2. Ensure all CI tasks (`lint`, `typecheck`, `test`, `build`, `docs`) pass locally.
3. Open a Pull Request with a clear description and links to any related issues.
4. Expect a review focusing on tests, documentation updates, and module design. Adherence to the project's design principles is key.

## Questions?
Open a GitHub issue with details or propose a design sketch in the PR description.

Commit message:

docs(plan): add barrel/cycle guidance; prune duplicate debug-labels task
When: 2025-10-13T00:00:00Z
Why: Codify current practice on barrels and prevent subtree cycles; remove a Next‑up item already marked as completed.

What changed:
- contributing.md: added “Barrels & cycle‑avoidance” section with guidelines on where to use barrels and how to avoid cycles.
- .stan/system/stan.todo.md: removed duplicate “Scope constants for debug labels” entry from Next up; kept “Import hygiene/knip” as the remaining item under the same heading.

contributing.md, after:

---
title: Contributing — Dev Quickstart
---

# Contributing — Dev Quickstart

Thanks for helping improve STAN! This project follows a services‑first, test‑first philosophy. Here’s how to get started locally.

## Setup

Prereqs:

- Node ≥ 20
- Git

Clone and install:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/karmaniverous/stan-cli.git
cd stan
npm i
```

## Common tasks

Run the full test and validation suite:

```bash
npm run lint
npm run typecheck
npm run test
npm run build
npm run docs
npm run knip
```

### Dev fallback (bootstrap scripts)

If `stan run` is temporarily broken while developing STAN itself, use the bootstrap scripts as a stopgap to exercise the pipeline and generate the usual artifacts (outputs and archive) without relying on the CLI:

- Primary orchestrator (runs multiple tasks concurrently and then archives):

  ```bash
  npm run bootstrap
  ```

  This will:
  - run typecheck, lint, test, build, and docs concurrently,
  - write deterministic outputs to `.stan/output/*.txt`,
  - and create `.stan/output/archive.tar`.

- You can also run individual bootstrap tasks:
  ```bash
  npm run bootstrap:typecheck
  npm run bootstrap:lint
  npm run bootstrap:test
  npm run bootstrap:build
  npm run bootstrap:docs
  npm run bootstrap:archive
  ```

Note: these bootstrap scripts are for STAN development only (fallback tooling). Consumers of STAN should use the CLI directly, e.g. `stan run`.

## Coding standards

- Single‑Responsibility modules; prefer small, testable units.
- Plain unified diffs for patches.
- Keep `.stan/system/stan.todo.md` updated with each change set and include a commit message (fenced) in chat replies.

### Barrels & cycle‑avoidance

- Prefer importing from barrels (directory index.ts) in tests and higher‑level modules to keep call sites stable and avoid deep paths.
- Avoid importing a barrel from within its own subtree to prevent cycles. Within a subtree, prefer local relative imports instead of the subtree’s barrel.
- Keep barrels as the only public entry points for their areas; treat internal files as implementation details.

## Submitting changes

1. Create a feature branch: `git checkout -b feature/your-change`
2. Ensure all CI tasks (`lint`, `typecheck`, `test`, `build`, `docs`) pass locally.
3. Open a Pull Request with a clear description and links to any related issues.
4. Expect a review focusing on tests, documentation updates, and module design. Adherence to the project's design principles is key.

## Questions?

Open a GitHub issue with details or propose a design sketch in the PR description.
