guides/stan-assistant-guide.md, before:

---
title: STAN assistant guide (stan-cli)
---

# STAN assistant guide — stan-cli

This guide is a compact, self-contained usage contract for `@karmaniverous/stan-cli` (the CLI + runner). It is written so a STAN assistant can use and integrate the package correctly without consulting `.d.ts` files or other repo documentation.

Related guides:
- [Bootloader & Assistant Setup](./bootloader.md)
- [Stan Configuration](./configuration.md)
- [CLI Usage & Examples](./cli-examples.md)
- [Archives & Snapshots](./archives-and-snapshots.md)

## What this package is (mental model)

`@karmaniverous/stan-cli` is the **CLI adapter layer** for STAN. It orchestrates a repeatable loop:

- **run**: execute scripts → capture deterministic text outputs → (optionally) archive the repo context (full + diff)
- **snap**: refresh the diff snapshot baseline and maintain a bounded snapshot history
- **patch**: apply (or validate) a unified diff (and optional File Ops), with diagnostics on failure

This package delegates “engine” responsibilities (file selection, archiving, diffing, patch pipeline internals) to `@karmaniverous/stan-core`.

Definitions (local):
- **TTY**: terminal mode where stdin/stdout are interactive (enables live UI + keypress capture).
- **LLM**: large language model (the assistant you are talking to).
- **Facet overlay**: a CLI-owned “view” that reduces archive size by excluding inactive subtrees while keeping breadcrumb “anchors”.

## Configuration (stan.config.*)

STAN resolves the nearest `stan.config.yml|yaml|json` by walking upward from `cwd`. The directory containing that config is treated as the effective repo root for the command.

### Current (recommended) namespaced config

`stan-cli` reads its own settings from top-level `stan-cli` and relies on the engine block `stan-core` for selection + `stanPath`:

```yaml
stan-core:
  stanPath: .stan
  includes: []
  excludes: []
  imports: {}

stan-cli:
  scripts:
    test: npm run test -- --no-color
    lint:
      script: npm run lint:fix
      warnPattern: \d+:\d+\s+warning
    build: npm run build
  cliDefaults:
    debug: false
    boring: false
    run:
      archive: true
      combine: false
      keep: false
      sequential: false
      plan: true
      live: true
      hangWarn: 120
      hangKill: 300
      hangKillGrace: 10
      # default script selection when -s is omitted:
      # true => all scripts, false => none, ["lint","test"] => only these keys
      scripts: true
      # prompt source used for archiving (see Prompt section below)
      prompt: auto
      # facet overlay default for this run (see Facets section)
      facets: false
    snap:
      stash: false
    patch:
      file: .stan/patch/last.patch
  patchOpenCommand: code -g {file}
  maxUndos: 10
  devMode: false
```

### Transitional legacy acceptance

Some code paths can temporarily accept legacy (pre-namespaced) config keys, but only when `STAN_ACCEPT_LEGACY=1`. Prefer migrating with:

```bash
stan init
```

## CLI contracts (what each command guarantees)

### `stan init`

- Creates or migrates `stan.config.*` to the namespaced layout.
- Writes a `.bak` next to the config when migrating.
- Ensures `.gitignore` includes standard `<stanPath>` subpaths and gitignores ephemeral state/metadata files.
- Ensures STAN workspace directories exist and writes `.stan/system/.docs.meta.json` (docs metadata).

### `stan run`

Produces deterministic outputs and (when enabled) archives:

- Script outputs: `<stanPath>/output/<key>.txt` (combined stdout/stderr).
- Full archive: `<stanPath>/output/archive.tar` (repo snapshot).
- Diff archive: `<stanPath>/output/archive.diff.tar` (changed-only vs snapshot baseline).

Live UI + cancellation:
- In TTY, live mode shows a progress table. Keys:
  - `q` cancels the run (best-effort skips archives; exit code set).
  - `r` restarts the run session (TTY only).

Combine mode:
- If `combine=true`, outputs are included inside archives and removed from disk afterward (archives remain).

### `stan snap`

- Refreshes the snapshot baseline used by diff archives.
- Maintains bounded history under `<stanPath>/diff/`:
  - `.snap.state.json` (stack + pointer),
  - `snapshots/` and (optionally) captured `archives/`.
- Optional `--stash`: `git stash -u` before snapshot and `stash pop` after.

### `stan patch`

Inputs (precedence):
1. `[input]` argument text
2. `-f/--file [filename]` (or configured default `stan-cli.cliDefaults.patch.file` unless `-F/--no-file`)
3. Clipboard

Behavior:
- Persists the raw patch payload to `<stanPath>/patch/.patch` (auditable).
- Applies either:
  - **File Ops only**, or
  - **Unified diff only** (hard rule: single-file diff).
- On failure: writes a compact diagnostics envelope and copies it to clipboard best-effort.
- On success (non-`--check`): may open the touched file in the editor using `patchOpenCommand` (`{file}` placeholder is repo-relative).

## Programmatic API (public exports)

This package’s stable programmatic exports are intentionally small. The CLI binary is the primary interface.

### `runSelected(...)`

Import:

```ts
import { runSelected } from '@karmaniverous/stan-cli';
```

Signature (contract-level):
- `runSelected(cwd, config, selection, mode, behavior, promptChoice?) => Promise<string[]>`

Where:
- `cwd: string` is the repo root to operate in.
- `config` is a `RunnerConfig`:
  - `stanPath: string` (workspace dir name, e.g. `.stan`)
  - `scripts: Record<string, string | { script: string; warnPattern?: string; warnPatternFlags?: string }>`
  - optional selection inputs forwarded into archiving when `behavior.archive=true`:
    - `includes?: string[]`, `excludes?: string[]`, `anchors?: string[]`, `imports?: Record<string, string[]>`
  - optional `overlayPlan?: string[]` (extra plan lines; presentation-only)
- `selection`:
  - `null` means “run all configured scripts”
  - `string[]` runs exactly those keys (caller should filter to known keys if desired)
- `mode: 'concurrent' | 'sequential'`
- `behavior`:
  - `archive?: boolean` (when true, create full + diff archives)
  - `combine?: boolean` (include outputs inside archives; remove outputs from disk)
  - `keep?: boolean` (do not clear output dir before running)
  - `live?: boolean` (TTY live UI; default behavior is “enabled when TTY”)
  - `plan?: boolean` (print plan first; false suppresses plan printing)
  - hang controls (TTY-only): `hangWarn`, `hangKill`, `hangKillGrace`
- `promptChoice?: string` controls which system prompt is used for archiving (see below).

Notes / invariants:
- `combine` implies archives conceptually; if you call `runSelected` directly, enforce `archive=true` yourself to avoid “combine with no archives” inconsistencies.
- The return value is the list of created artifact paths (outputs and archives) as absolute paths.

### `renderAvailableScriptsHelp(cwd)`

Import:

```ts
import { renderAvailableScriptsHelp } from '@karmaniverous/stan-cli';
```

Returns a help footer string listing available script keys (best-effort; returns `''` if config cannot be loaded).

### Script types

`@karmaniverous/stan-cli` also re-exports (for docs completeness) script config types:
- `ScriptEntry`, `ScriptMap`, `ScriptObject`

These describe the shape of `stan-cli.scripts` entries (string shorthand or object form).

## Prompt selection (run)

`stan run` (and `runSelected`) can resolve a system prompt source for archiving:

- `auto` (default): prefer local `<stanPath>/system/stan.system.md`; fall back to packaged core prompt.
- `local`: require `<stanPath>/system/stan.system.md`.
- `core`: use packaged prompt from `@karmaniverous/stan-core`.
- `<path>`: absolute or repo-relative path to a prompt file.

Archiving behavior:
- Full archive always contains `<stanPath>/system/stan.system.md` representing the prompt used for the run (materialized temporarily when needed).
- Diff archive suppresses `stan.system.md` in steady state for `core`/`<path>` sources when unchanged vs snapshot baseline; it appears once when the effective prompt changes.

## Facet overlay (run “view”)

Facet overlay is CLI-owned; it changes what the engine sees via composed `excludes` (deny-list) and `anchors` (high-precedence re-includes).

Facet files (under `<stanPath>/system/`):
- `facet.meta.json`: durable facet definitions (`exclude` patterns + `include` anchor paths)
- `facet.state.json`: next-run default activation (`true` = active, `false` = inactive)
- `.docs.meta.json`: stores overlay metadata for the last run (enabled/effective/autosuspended/anchorsKept, etc.)

Run flags:
- `-f, --facets` enables overlay for this run
- `-F, --no-facets` disables overlay for this run
- `--facets-on <names...>` forces named facets active (this run only; does not persist)
- `--facets-off <names...>` forces named facets inactive (this run only; does not persist)

Overlay safety:
- When a facet is inactive by default/state and its excluded subtree has no on-disk anchors, the CLI may auto-suspend the drop (treat it active) to avoid accidentally hiding large areas without breadcrumbs.
- Explicit per-run `--facets-off` must remain off (no auto-suspension).

## Common integration pitfalls

- Wrong `stanPath`: always read it from `stan-core.stanPath` (do not assume `.stan`).
- Legacy configs: avoid depending on legacy root keys; migrate with `stan init`.
- Combine without archives: enforce `archive=true` when `combine=true`.
- Multi-file diffs: `stan patch` enforces a single-file unified diff (one target) per apply payload.
- Non-TTY environments: live UI is skipped; expect logger-style output behavior.

## Maintenance note (policy reminder)

If public exports, config shape/semantics, prompt behavior, overlay behavior, or patch/snap contracts change, update this guide in the same change set.

Commit message:

docs: sync facet overlay docs w/ behavior
When: 2025-12-31T00:00:00Z
Why: Remove stale “-f activates all facets” wording and ensure every
     user-facing guide matches current overlay/filter/anchor semantics.

What changed:
- .stan/system/stan.requirements.md
  - Clarify -f enables overlay only (no implicit activate-all).
- guides/cli-examples.md
  - Add notes on overlay enablement vs per-facet activation; filter facets.
- guides/archives-and-snapshots.md
  - Clarify overlay-aware snapshot behavior for filter facets.
- guides/configuration.md
  - Disambiguate cliDefaults.run.facets meaning.
- guides/stan-assistant-guide.md
  - Add diff “new anchored file may appear once” note; clarify -f semantics.
- .stan/system/stan.todo.md
  - Mark docs pass completed and update Next up accordingly.

guides/stan-assistant-guide.md, after:

---
title: STAN assistant guide (stan-cli)
---

# STAN assistant guide — stan-cli

This guide is a compact, self-contained usage contract for `@karmaniverous/stan-cli` (the CLI + runner). It is written so a STAN assistant can use and integrate the package correctly without consulting `.d.ts` files or other repo documentation.

Related guides:
- [Bootloader & Assistant Setup](./bootloader.md)
- [Stan Configuration](./configuration.md)
- [CLI Usage & Examples](./cli-examples.md)
- [Archives & Snapshots](./archives-and-snapshots.md)

## What this package is (mental model)

`@karmaniverous/stan-cli` is the **CLI adapter layer** for STAN. It orchestrates a repeatable loop:

- **run**: execute scripts → capture deterministic text outputs → (optionally) archive the repo context (full + diff)
- **snap**: refresh the diff snapshot baseline and maintain a bounded snapshot history
- **patch**: apply (or validate) a unified diff (and optional File Ops), with diagnostics on failure

This package delegates “engine” responsibilities (file selection, archiving, diffing, patch pipeline internals) to `@karmaniverous/stan-core`.

Definitions (local):
- **TTY**: terminal mode where stdin/stdout are interactive (enables live UI + keypress capture).
- **LLM**: large language model (the assistant you are talking to).
- **Facet overlay**: a CLI-owned “view” that reduces archive size by excluding inactive subtrees while keeping breadcrumb “anchors”.

## Configuration (stan.config.*)

STAN resolves the nearest `stan.config.yml|yaml|json` by walking upward from `cwd`. The directory containing that config is treated as the effective repo root for the command.

### Current (recommended) namespaced config

`stan-cli` reads its own settings from top-level `stan-cli` and relies on the engine block `stan-core` for selection + `stanPath`:

```yaml
stan-core:
  stanPath: .stan
  includes: []
  excludes: []
  imports: {}

stan-cli:
  scripts:
    test: npm run test -- --no-color
    lint:
      script: npm run lint:fix
      warnPattern: \d+:\d+\s+warning
    build: npm run build
  cliDefaults:
    debug: false
    boring: false
    run:
      archive: true
      combine: false
      keep: false
      sequential: false
      plan: true
      live: true
      hangWarn: 120
      hangKill: 300
      hangKillGrace: 10
      # default script selection when -s is omitted:
      # true => all scripts, false => none, ["lint","test"] => only these keys
      scripts: true
      # prompt source used for archiving (see Prompt section below)
      prompt: auto
      # facet overlay default for this run (see Facets section)
      facets: false
    snap:
      stash: false
    patch:
      file: .stan/patch/last.patch
  patchOpenCommand: code -g {file}
  maxUndos: 10
  devMode: false
```

### Transitional legacy acceptance

Some code paths can temporarily accept legacy (pre-namespaced) config keys, but only when `STAN_ACCEPT_LEGACY=1`. Prefer migrating with:

```bash
stan init
```

## CLI contracts (what each command guarantees)

### `stan init`

- Creates or migrates `stan.config.*` to the namespaced layout.
- Writes a `.bak` next to the config when migrating.
- Ensures `.gitignore` includes standard `<stanPath>` subpaths and gitignores ephemeral state/metadata files.
- Ensures STAN workspace directories exist and writes `.stan/system/.docs.meta.json` (docs metadata).

### `stan run`

Produces deterministic outputs and (when enabled) archives:

- Script outputs: `<stanPath>/output/<key>.txt` (combined stdout/stderr).
- Full archive: `<stanPath>/output/archive.tar` (repo snapshot).
- Diff archive: `<stanPath>/output/archive.diff.tar` (changed-only vs snapshot baseline).

Live UI + cancellation:
- In TTY, live mode shows a progress table. Keys:
  - `q` cancels the run (best-effort skips archives; exit code set).
  - `r` restarts the run session (TTY only).

Combine mode:
- If `combine=true`, outputs are included inside archives and removed from disk afterward (archives remain).

### `stan snap`

- Refreshes the snapshot baseline used by diff archives.
- Maintains bounded history under `<stanPath>/diff/`:
  - `.snap.state.json` (stack + pointer),
  - `snapshots/` and (optionally) captured `archives/`.
- Optional `--stash`: `git stash -u` before snapshot and `stash pop` after.

### `stan patch`

Inputs (precedence):
1. `[input]` argument text
2. `-f/--file [filename]` (or configured default `stan-cli.cliDefaults.patch.file` unless `-F/--no-file`)
3. Clipboard

Behavior:
- Persists the raw patch payload to `<stanPath>/patch/.patch` (auditable).
- Applies either:
  - **File Ops only**, or
  - **Unified diff only** (hard rule: single-file diff).
- On failure: writes a compact diagnostics envelope and copies it to clipboard best-effort.
- On success (non-`--check`): may open the touched file in the editor using `patchOpenCommand` (`{file}` placeholder is repo-relative).

## Programmatic API (public exports)

This package’s stable programmatic exports are intentionally small. The CLI binary is the primary interface.

### `runSelected(...)`

Import:

```ts
import { runSelected } from '@karmaniverous/stan-cli';
```

Signature (contract-level):
- `runSelected(cwd, config, selection, mode, behavior, promptChoice?) => Promise<string[]>`

Where:
- `cwd: string` is the repo root to operate in.
- `config` is a `RunnerConfig`:
  - `stanPath: string` (workspace dir name, e.g. `.stan`)
  - `scripts: Record<string, string | { script: string; warnPattern?: string; warnPatternFlags?: string }>`
  - optional selection inputs forwarded into archiving when `behavior.archive=true`:
    - `includes?: string[]`, `excludes?: string[]`, `anchors?: string[]`, `imports?: Record<string, string[]>`
  - optional `overlayPlan?: string[]` (extra plan lines; presentation-only)
- `selection`:
  - `null` means “run all configured scripts”
  - `string[]` runs exactly those keys (caller should filter to known keys if desired)
- `mode: 'concurrent' | 'sequential'`
- `behavior`:
  - `archive?: boolean` (when true, create full + diff archives)
  - `combine?: boolean` (include outputs inside archives; remove outputs from disk)
  - `keep?: boolean` (do not clear output dir before running)
  - `live?: boolean` (TTY live UI; default behavior is “enabled when TTY”)
  - `plan?: boolean` (print plan first; false suppresses plan printing)
  - hang controls (TTY-only): `hangWarn`, `hangKill`, `hangKillGrace`
- `promptChoice?: string` controls which system prompt is used for archiving (see below).

Notes / invariants:
- `combine` implies archives conceptually; if you call `runSelected` directly, enforce `archive=true` yourself to avoid “combine with no archives” inconsistencies.
- The return value is the list of created artifact paths (outputs and archives) as absolute paths.

### `renderAvailableScriptsHelp(cwd)`

Import:

```ts
import { renderAvailableScriptsHelp } from '@karmaniverous/stan-cli';
```

Returns a help footer string listing available script keys (best-effort; returns `''` if config cannot be loaded).

### Script types

`@karmaniverous/stan-cli` also re-exports (for docs completeness) script config types:
- `ScriptEntry`, `ScriptMap`, `ScriptObject`

These describe the shape of `stan-cli.scripts` entries (string shorthand or object form).

## Prompt selection (run)

`stan run` (and `runSelected`) can resolve a system prompt source for archiving:

- `auto` (default): prefer local `<stanPath>/system/stan.system.md`; fall back to packaged core prompt.
- `local`: require `<stanPath>/system/stan.system.md`.
- `core`: use packaged prompt from `@karmaniverous/stan-core`.
- `<path>`: absolute or repo-relative path to a prompt file.

Archiving behavior:
- Full archive always contains `<stanPath>/system/stan.system.md` representing the prompt used for the run (materialized temporarily when needed).
- Diff archive suppresses `stan.system.md` in steady state for `core`/`<path>` sources when unchanged vs snapshot baseline; it appears once when the effective prompt changes.

## Facet overlay (run “view”)

Facet overlay is CLI-owned; it changes what the engine sees via composed `excludes` (deny-list) and `anchors` (high-precedence re-includes).

Facet files (under `<stanPath>/system/`):
- `facet.meta.json`: durable facet definitions (`exclude` patterns + `include` anchor paths)
- `facet.state.json`: next-run default activation (`true` = active, `false` = inactive)
- `.docs.meta.json`: stores overlay metadata for the last run (enabled/effective/autosuspended/anchorsKept, etc.)

Run flags:
- `-f, --facets` enables overlay for this run
- `-F, --no-facets` disables overlay for this run
- `--facets-on <names...>` forces named facets active (this run only; does not persist)
- `--facets-off <names...>` forces named facets inactive (this run only; does not persist)

Notes:

- `-f, --facets` enables the overlay only; it does not implicitly activate all facets. Per-facet activation comes from `<stanPath>/system/facet.state.json` plus per-run overrides.
- Diff archives remain “changed-only”: anchored files appear in `archive.diff.tar` only when changed vs the active snapshot baseline. If an anchored file did not exist at baseline time and is introduced afterward, it may appear once as “added” in the next diff (expected).

Overlay safety:
- When a facet is inactive by default/state and its excluded subtree has no on-disk anchors, the CLI may auto-suspend the drop (treat it active) to avoid accidentally hiding large areas without breadcrumbs.
- Explicit per-run `--facets-off` must remain off (no auto-suspension).

## Common integration pitfalls

- Wrong `stanPath`: always read it from `stan-core.stanPath` (do not assume `.stan`).
- Legacy configs: avoid depending on legacy root keys; migrate with `stan init`.
- Combine without archives: enforce `archive=true` when `combine=true`.
- Multi-file diffs: `stan patch` enforces a single-file unified diff (one target) per apply payload.
- Non-TTY environments: live UI is skipped; expect logger-style output behavior.

## Maintenance note (policy reminder)

If public exports, config shape/semantics, prompt behavior, overlay behavior, or patch/snap contracts change, update this guide in the same change set.
